Okay. So, morning everybody. Um, so it's
a bit of a delay here. Fine. So, um,
just to show you how to navigate around
the material. Um, this is the Archer 2
um, homepage. Uh, the Arch 2 training
page. And if you go to upcoming
training, you will see the advanced NPI
course is this one here. That's the
generic page, but what's been added
quite recently is the um the course
materials. So if you go to So if you go
to the the training course page, go to
course materials, you will see that a
slightly scrappy uh markup page. Uh I
have put in the uh timetable.
So um the first talk I was going to give
the tips and tricks. So we're doing 10
to four each day. Uh I've tried to
tailor it to what people said in the
survey. Um, I'm pulling material from a
bunch of different sources here. So
hopefully it may not flow 100% smoothly,
but hopefully it'll make some sense. Um,
so these links will link to the
material. These are links to the PDFs of
the material for example. That's the um
Okay, that's the the course we've just
had. Um, the exercise material I've got
down here. Now, we're not going to do
any exercises till uh after the first
coffee break, I don't think. In fact,
actually till after lunch. Uh but um the
exercises are are here. Um they're
slightly um we'll go through them, but
this should be all the material. It's
not particularly brilliantly arranged uh
but hopefully should make sense. Um um
so the first exercise we're going to do
actually is after the after lunch you'll
do a ping pong and that will hopefully
illustrate some of the um um some of the
topics we I've covered in the NPN
interns. But uh a lot of people wanted
to have the sort of tips and tricks
lectures. That's what I'm going to give
first. Um so hope that so that's where
the that's where the the the material is
just to go back um the main arch to the
arch to training upcoming training
you'll see the link to the advanced NPI
and then go to the course materials and
this is just a a stand this is a GitHub
page uh which hopefully explains
everything.
So this um tips and tricks lecture is
actually one of the last lectures I give
on my message passing course. However, I
have run a shorter of the introductory
message passing course. I run a slightly
shorter version of that these days. So I
don't give that in that session. So
hopefully I'm not repeating material
that you already have known. If you have
heard this talk before, I do up this is
one of the talks I do update relatively
uh relatively frequently. So let's um
okay
so please um now this is basically
um you know you've written NPI programs
hopefully written a few yourself um and
this is going through sort of tips and
tricks and please comment on these
please ask questions we're going through
this is this is I used to this is rather
um a butterfly collecting of different
kinds of topics and such but Um
hopefully it is uh interesting. So
okay, there's a bit of a delay there
with our message passing program tips
and tricks.
So um you know what are we aiming to do?
Well, we're aiming to write correct MPI
programs obviously that are portable to
many systems. um you know um you want to
software is much uh longer lived than
hardware and so you you want your code
to be portable easily portable to many
systems. You want to be efficient and
you want to be easy to maintain and so
this talk is a is a sort of um um a
mixture of sort of software development
and and specific tips and tricks. So
please ask questions as you go as we go
along if you have any issues. So and
this so these are the kind of things
which I have sort of come across that
people have problems with and they kind
of cover all these in the talk.
Um common problems in NPI assuming NPI
send is asynchronous that causes
non-portability I'll cover that general
nonportability issues. Um program
specific process counts that's that's
something which people do as beginners
but I'll cover that. Uh issues with
collectives um again that's that's maybe
a bit basic but I'll cover it quickly.
Incorrect use of non-blocking is a very
important one. I see that quite a lot.
Uh sending lots of small messages is an
issue. Array allocation issues in C is
always an issue. Um um C is um
um
is pretty terrible for the way it has
support for arrays. C++ is probably a
bit better. But you get you get you get
issues here and I'll talk about that.
Array text issues in forran I may not
cover. But this is one of the things I
actually wanted to cover in in the in
the in the uh um
in the uh
um
what people did.
So I'm actually going to start a quiz
here if just to get if people you I
would just get a a use a feeling for. So
this was one of the questions in the in
the board.
Okay. So that is useful to note. So so
so full disclosure I'm not really a C++
programmer. Um but then NPI is in C++
interface. Uh so please correct me if I
but but I I'm I'm so that's it's so
that's very interesting to know that
half people for programs. is I will
cover thank you uh I will cover um the
uh array syntax issues in forran that is
uh thank you very much that was very
useful um and uh code readability and
general debugging problems
so so we'll cover this when we talk
about NPI internals maybe motivate why
this is but um one of the issues about
NPI uh is you know if you're learning
message passing for the first time you'd
ask how do I send a message and someone
says well use NPI send and then you
would ask well is it synchronous or
asynchronous does it does if I issue an
NPI send and there's no and there is no
receive does the program deadlock or not
and the problem is that you don't know
uh MPI for reasons known to itself which
I will try and motivate a bit later
doesn't define if NPI send is
synchronous or asynchronous if it's like
sending a letter or making a phone call
and this can cause so a lot of people
assume that NPI send a lot of people
assume that NPI send is asynchronous.
They assume that NPI send will be like
sending an email be a fire and forget.
Now that is often true for small
messages. Okay, for small messages NPI
send will tend to be asynchronous
meaning it will be buffered. What will
happen is NPI will say okay David's
sending a small message. I'll take a
copy of that message squirrel it away
and send it later on. So that means
there's less likelihood of deadlock
because you don't have to have a receive
pending. However, that's not guaranteed.
So you should always program as if NPI
send is synchronous. You should always
make sure a receive is posted at the
time you post NPI send. A lot of people
forget that. And this the problem is
that the typically small messages are
buffered but large messages are not
buffered. This thresholds varies with
implementation. So that your code may
run on one machine and deadlock on
another. And so you know this is a real
problem. So you really have to to to
worry about this for portability. Uh a
correct code will run with all NPI send
calls replaced by NPIs send. NPI send is
synchronous send. It's guaranteed
synchronous. There's no receive posted.
It will wait and then potentially wait
forever. And so you know that um that is
a big issue. You can ask for NPI to do
an asynchronous send, a buffered send,
but with NPIB send, but it's really
rather a horrible routine and that I
it's not very widely used. It's in the
stand. It's not very widely used. It's a
nasty routine um for various reasons,
but this is a major portability problem.
So, one of the classic reasons when
people um whoops, I don't know why I'm
doing that. One of the classic reasons
where people say there's a bug on your
machine, my program runs on this machine
but not on yours is because they've
assumed NPI send is asynchronous. And
we'll cover in some uh uh when we look
at the internals why NPI decides not to
define if NPI send is synchronous or
asynchronous
data sizes. Um
it's not such a big deal now when there
are so few compilers and hardware and
operating systems. you know, 15 years,
20 years ago with the lots of different
compilers, um you there were so for
example, it used to be on Cray systems a
real was eight bytes. Uh was like a real
was on a Cray system or a float on a
Cray system was what everyone else would
call a double. Um but be careful of data
size or layout. Um be careful of compile
pad infrastructures. So it's just a
general it's just a general um um
comment. Try not to assume that integers
are four bytes or that that reals are
four bytes or doubles. Well, use there
are various runtime inquiries. The thing
which which I do see that people do do
fairly badly is they they write a
program which uses floats or or or or
reals which are single precision then
they want to convert to double
precision. Uh so they do they have some
magic flag minus minus convert floats to
doubles um or they put it in forrand
that's not a good thing to do because of
course in an MPI code not only do you
have um floats and doubles or reals and
double positions in your as as
declaration to your language. You also
pass them to to NPI calls and you have
to then pass NPI float or NPI double or
NPI double precision or NPI NPI real.
And so you know if you want to code
which runs in both single and double
precision for example you can't use
magic compiler flags because you also
need to change the NPI definitions as
well and I you know I would say the
right way to do this if from the start
you want to write a code which can be in
single double precision or heaven forbid
half precision
you're doing machine learning um it's
easiest thing to do is to use an include
file. So, what you do is you have a an a
header file, an include file. I can see
there's a question here. Sorry.
I'm slightly struggling for screen
facing on my laptop, so apologies.
Uh, okay. So, no, no. So, so, so, so
Mark has asked about NPI MPI. No. So,
the correct way to avoid deadlock is to
use NPIcent. Okay. That's that that is
the right thing to do. Okay. So we'll
cover that a bit when we look at
performance and such like but NPI said
it's the right thing to do. Okay,
because NPI is said will avoid deadlock
um by being by by by being um ace well
in NPI terms non-blocking.
So however you can you will probably get
if you don't use if you just use NPI
send you will probably get away with it
for small messages because they will not
you will not get deadlock. Okay.
However, to safely program with NPI send
and guarantee your code is deadlock
free, then in practice, you will have to
use NPI send. There it's a slightly
subtle thing. It's one of the annoying
things about NPI that one of the most
basic questions you ask is, is the send
routine synchronous or asynchronous?
Does it wait or does it not wait? Is is
is under. But yes, MPN is the right way
to program. Does that make sense, Mark?
Yeah,
>> but but but what what a lot of people do
is they don't use, they use send and
they get away with it because they've
got small messages and then they run a
big problem or they run on a different
machine and the code suddenly deadlocks
because they have incorrectly assumed
the NPI send the NPI send so I have to
be careful that the blocking form NPI
send is asynchronous. Um so if you want
to do what you should do is you should
have a header file or equivalent in C++
I guess but in C you would do typeless
float real number and nowhere in your
code do you say um do you say um you do
you say float or npi or npi float? You
say say hash define npi real number npi
float and then you say uh type type
their float real number and so when in
your in your code you do real number x
which here is a uh float and you npi
routine and you pass npi real number
which is also an npi float but if you
want to change double precision you just
change these two numbers these two the
two these two definitions in the header
file recompile and the whole thing works
for you. So um you know I'm not a fan of
using magic compiler flag because of
course again the compiler flags are by
definition compiler specific and those
flags may not exist on a different
compiler
in forran forran is a very sophisticated
type system uh and you could you do the
same thing in in forran uh you would
have a module which define the precision
you'd have a real number and npi real
number and you do um you would do
something like this use precision real
kind of real number x np I reg X NPI
real number and these are then defined
as here single precision but it' be a
trivial change to change that to that to
1.0 or dn that's npi double precision
and your code then compiles and runs in
both precisions
and I well there's a lot of reasons why
I think this is good um you may say I
only ever want to run in double
precision but actually
um
reproducibility is a well reproducibly
reproducibility stroke verification is a
real problem in scientific and technical
programming because you're using 13point
numbers which aren't guaranted And
you'll get typically get different
numbers on different numbers of
processes, different numbers on um
certainly different compilers which
rearrange things. So the question with
my code correct is a subtle one. And
when people get small differences, they
often say that's rounding error. Well,
how do you know? Okay, so if you can
change the precision, so if you normally
run in double precision and and and your
results differ by one part in 10 to the
five or 10 to the six, you might say
that looks like rounding error. But it
could just be a bug. If you can then run
the code in single precision and that
error gets larger, that gives you
evidence that it is a rounding error. If
the error stays the same, you've just
got a bug. Okay? And I always say people
think that one part and 10^ the six is a
small error. Okay? But it's not. If you
have arrays which are 100 by 100 by 100
and you get one you have a 3D problem
with arrays that are 100 by 100 by 100
that means there's a million elements in
each in each array. If you get one of
those wrong which for example you do a
halo swap and you miss one of the halo
entries. Okay, that is a difference of
one part and a million one part and 10
the six. So people are much too quick to
say, "Oh, that's okay. It's just
rounding out without any evidence." But
that's a slide on the side.
Non-portability um correct C code, a
correct C code or forran code should
compile with any C compiler or forran
compiler and also therefore a correct
NPI code should also run correctly with
any NPI library. And the problem is that
people often well I do as well people
often develop and and debug and um and
and and verify their programs on their
laptop but they might be using open NPI
for example but then you go to a you you
port to another system like Archer 2 and
it's not using open NPI it's using Cray
MPI which is based on NPIC2.
So um you might think that running so
that running on more than one machine is
a good test. I've run this code on on on
my laptop and I've run it on a an HPC
cluster, but actually uh many parallel
clusters will use the same open source
MPI. Here you're not really testing is
the hardware different. You're testing
is the library different. Running on two
different HP systems may not be a good
test. Okay. So you may have assumed
things in your code. You may have
assumed a certain behavior of NPI which
might be true in one library but not
another. It's just like saying in in a
for a C code integer I or int I and
assuming that I is set to zero. It's not
guaranteed. It you might be lucky. It
might be set a particular compiler might
be kind to you and and set default
integers to be zero but then it's not
it's not um it's not um um guaranteed.
And so just like you should always check
the portability of your program by
compiling on different compilers, you
should check the portability of your NPI
program by running on different NPI
libraries. And to be honest, one of the
nicest things is you have more than one
implementation of the same machine. Now,
unfortunately on AR 2, we're it's it
we're locked to a large extent to Cray
MPI, but you know, if you have your
laptop, install NPI, CH2 and open MPI
and then, you know, it's or use Intel
NPI. It's a really really good
development uh trick or um methodology
to regularly check your program is
correct when running on different NPI
libraries.
code readability. This is a big one. Uh
adding MPI and destroy a code. Um we
would like to maintain a serial version
because we'd like to say well what's the
correct ver what's what's my correct
answer? My parallel program gives this
answer. What's my correct answer? It
would be nice to say what do I get in
the serial code. Um it would be be nice
to compile and run identical code
without an NPI library. Actually I don't
mean running with an NPI code with one P
is the number of processors. I don't
mean running with NPI to one processor.
I run I mean running without the NPI
library. So for a whole bunch of reasons
um what you should do and this is a
really important
um software development approach is you
should separate your communications into
into into a separate library. So what
I'm saying is your your code should not
be sprinkled with hundreds of NPI calls.
It should have a small number of
meaningful calls. So what you say when
you write your code is okay what
parallel operations do I need to do in
my program I need to do global sums I
need to do halo swaps I need to do
gathers so you write a routine called
global sum halo swap and ga and you
implement that using NPI you don't
scatter random NPI course throughout
your whole code and that has a whole
bunch of um of of of um advantages um
and so uh there's no explicit reference
to API in your main code and What it
allows you to do is actually provide a
dummy library for the serial code. If
you if you go to the whole hog, you can
actually then have a library which
allows you to compile and run your
program in serial
without access to an NPL library at all
which is also a nice thing to do. So I
have an example here which I did with
forran but I do have a C example later
on you know. So for example, okay, um,
if you want to initialize an NPI
program,
uh, you have to call NPI in the I error.
You have to include a header file. You
have to do NPI COM size and NPI COM
right all NPI programs start like that.
Okay. Um, well that's really nasty,
horrible code to have nice to have a
routine called power begin. Okay. So
this four-term routine for my four-term
program here this comes from something I
wrote a long time ago had a function
called power begin which which returned
the size i.e the number of processes and
the pro and the proc ID the ID the ID of
the process uh and in fact in this
program I got sick of the fact that npi
refers to processes starting from zero.
So in my main program I referred them
from one I added once the proc ID and
obviously subtracted off later on. And
then for example for your serial machine
this is this is just a completely dummy
routine but you know you should you
should not have random NPI calls in your
main code here your main code goes call
again and that looks much nicer than
these three rather um meaningless NPI
calls
a global sum. Okay, if I want to do a
global sum of a single double precision
number, I have to do NPI or reduce of
the value into a temp because by default
we can't use the same one. It's one NPI
double precision NPI sum com was defined
elsewhere as com. Well, I this is really
vastly over complicated syntax. What I
really want to do is have a function sub
call it par sum. a function which does a
parallel double precision month number
double precision sorry a parallel sum of
double precision number and if I know
I'm always using com world but I know
I'm always using doubles um and I only
want a single scaler here I can make the
the the call in the in the main program
much more um readable okay and then for
the serial machine of course I have I
return nothing it I don't need to do
anything here so my main code when I
want to do a parallel double precision
sum is in for call bumpar d sum of x
which is much nicer than npi will reduce
x x 10 1 mpi position npi 7 mpi a com
world I error okay so that that's much
nicer
and then in your make file if you if you
or if you're a cmake person be more
sophisticated than this I basically I
have my for for reasons unknown only to
myself I actually had two uh I I
scrolled away my mpf functions in two um
routines dem parallel and dems. But
basically my my sequential source this
code here had no explicit call to NPI. I
have routines called the halo swapping
power in it par dum. These routines were
defined in NPI source. I also had a fake
source and I had to have parallel
sources fake source for NPI source. I
could compile up a serial or parallel
program from the same source with a very
small chain. Now this is something it's
almost impossible to retrofit but it's a
very good design decision to take right
from the start.
So um and and in C uh you know ugly code
NPI null null this is particularly
horrible in C npit a nice you do power
again size rank okay this is much nicer
to do okay and then you basically
implement that with these um in this so
so your main code just has power again
size rank and it's implemented in npi
and of course this is a bit of a trivia
example but it becomes much more
useful when these are more these are
message passing operations like um well
like like summation but also halo
swapping and such.
Uh so again yeah you know um rainfall is
par d sum of rainfall uh is much in
forran is much more um um is is much
more um sorry in c example rainfall is
par d sum of rainfall is much more in a
say I've got a climate modeling code is
much more um um readable and useful than
than this kind of stuff here. Okay. And
so you know if you have a comment
globally sum the par double preision
rainfall value rainfall is part sum of
rainfall that makes sense even somebody
who's not a parallel programmer whereas
this
whoops sorry this is just gibberish.
Okay so again it makes your code much
more readable to to all and sanding.
Again this is just a make file. So you
know why is putting your all your API
calls in the library worthwhile? Well,
if you if you really gun for it, you can
compile a serial program from the same
source. It makes the parallel code much
more readable. And for example, um you
know, if you if you're concerned that
some of your double imagine
you think I think that somewhere along
the way my double precision accum my my
my my reductions of my double precision
variables are getting funny results. If
uh if you have a 100 calls to NPI or
reduce in your code, you then have to
put debug statements into a 100 lines.
If you funnel all your NPI or reduces
through one of your own functions, you
can just add debugging to that function
on entry. Say, you know, uh the input
value on rank this is bus and the output
value is this. So it makes debugging
much better. This is not such a big deal
now, but definitely in the old days when
NPI wasn't necessarily completely
optimized everywhere, it enables the
code to be ported to other libraries.
Imagine someone said on the cray there's
this really really fast handcoded super
fast um routine for doing double
precision global sums. You don't want to
replace a thousand calls to MPI reduce
with this magic cray routine. But if you
have if you again if you funneled all
your MPI
um or reduces all your reductions
through your own routine you can just
change that. Okay. And again we'll see
this later on. we do halo swapping you
know if I want to swap halos should I
use send b send I send is send desk s
whatever there's a hundred ways of doing
it if you funnel all your halo swapping
calls through a function call called
halo swap you can then basically
whenever you port your code to a new
machine play you might have half a dozen
implementations of the halo swapping all
done in slightly different ways and you
can pick the one uh which is fastest on
your target machine so you can optimize
your comps for different NPI libraries
okay one NPI library might best to do
what to do one method of sending on
another. It might be a question doing
another.
Uh so that's really that's a general you
know design. Um and this used to be very
common in the old days when you didn't
even know you had NPI. You didn't even
know what your message passing library
was going to be. So you funneled all
your communications through your own
interfaces and then implemented them
with other now now NPI is universally
available. There's the temptation not to
do this but it is still a a good um
discipline and programming technique.
Um this is something which um you know
this won't call this is a simple error
but you know not calling collectors
correct correctly you have to call
collectors with all processes in the
communicator you know people when
they're learning NPI uh would do this if
rank equals zero NPIB cast that's not
correct uh uh you have to call um the
all you have to call a collective on all
the process and obviously if you did if
rank equals zero call reducing call
deadlock how this is Another um
sometimes um people use reduce in the
sense so if you remember all reduce is
is a global sum where every process gets
the answer. Uh in reduce you specify a
root process. You might say well only
rank zero needs to know this summation.
I'll call reduce and just have rank zero
know the answer. The problem with the
way that you program NPI which is an
SPMD model single program multiple data.
If you have a variable called uh let's
say global rainfall okay
that variable exists on every process if
you compute it with a global sum but
only place the answer on a rank zero
then you have a a a variable called
global rainfall which only makes sense
on one process now you may remember that
when you write the code but two years
later you'll come back and you might say
oh there's this variable called global
rainfall I need to know that everywhere
so just as a defensive programming
technique. I tend to use all reduces
everywhere in preference to reduce. You
know, perhaps you only need really need
to know that the the value on the
controller process, but but using all
reduce makes things simpler and there
really aren't any serious performance
implications. I think it's I think it's
it's it's a nasty side effect of the
SPMD model where every MPI process runs
exactly the same code that all variables
exist everywhere even if their values
make sense and you may forget that. So I
think using all reduces is a good
programming technique.
Error checking um this is you know um uh
this is um something which you might do.
You might say well check for results.
I've got a partial value
which is one float. I'll sum it up
everywhere but I know for example this
summation might be uh a rainfall total
rain. Clearly the rainfall is is less.
It has to be positive or at least non-
negative. So you might do an error check
if sum is less than zero print error.
Okay, this is a dangerous thing to do
because um
um
uh because um sorry I'm being an idiot
here. I've done an MP. So what I'm
trying to say is I've done a reduction
operation here. Okay, I'm doing NPI
reduce or reduce. So this summation
value is only is only known on rank
zero. Okay. So this is not a sensible
thing to do. Okay. What you should do is
everyone needs to know the result. So
what you see sometimes some people doing
is they broadcast. You see people do a
reduce and then a broadcast. You should
not do this. Okay? You should use NPI or
reduce. So sometimes you see people
they've done a reduce then they think
well I want to I now need want everyone
to know the result. Um so so so for for
this code to stop correctly, everyone
needs to know the value of the sum. So
so they can all so they can all uh
independently uh uh terminate execution
of the program. But you often see people
do reduce and broadcast. Do not use
reduce plus broadcast, use all reduce.
This is probably going to be twice the
all reduce will probably be twice as
fast as this. So reduce plus broadcast
is not a good thing to do. You should
use all reduce and just get the answer
everywhere right from the start.
Uh this is something and this is I mean
I always say you know when you the most
important thing when you're writing an
NPI program is to get the kept correct
result and not to worry about
performance too early on but but but uh
you should not send lots of small
messages. Okay. So so you should not do
something like this. Okay. I want to
send the in C I want to send uh the
contiguous part of an array in four
channel will be it would be the first
index in C the contiguous part of the
second index I want to send the N values
X not N which might be a halo I'm doing
boundary exchange uh empty I send this
value one in to the destination but I
loop over J this is very very very slow
you're sending a large number of small
messages you should send a single
message of size N okay so this is fairly
basic stuff. We can do a single send of
this and this will be a lot lot lot
faster than that. Okay. uh MPI what we
we will see after the break if we we
look at performance that the latency the
overhead of sending an MPI message is
large even on a machine like Archer 2
with a dedicated network it is in at
best in the microsconds a few
microsconds which which is millionth of
a second which might sound like a small
amount remember modern CPUs are clocking
at multiple gigahertz so the clock cycle
isn't is in the nanconds
uh and so a millisecond
a microcond apology ies is is is is a is
thousands of times um um more expensive
than doing maybe a floatingoint
calculation. And so you know if there's
one optimization technique for NPI, it's
do a small number of large messages, not
a large number of small messages. Now
this is fairly easy to do because the
data is contiguous.
But what happens if you want to send in
C the first uh uh dimension or in four
the second one where the data isn't
contiguous uh well you use a derived
type or a vector. So uh you do not loop
over on the so you cannot because the
data is not contiguous here if I want to
send x00 x10 up to x n minus one 0
that's there's a that's a strided
pattern because I'm moving over this
index not this one. Um but uh the way to
do that is to use a vector. Okay. Now
you could uh an a vector is is is a
strided type which which you have to
define it appropriately. But having done
that you can send one vector. Now you
could do copy in to a temporary buffer
send and copy out again. Performance is
probably not that bad but it is ugly.
And so derived types such as vectors are
very very useful for sending um for
ensuring you send a small number of
large messages but doing it in a neat
way without explicit copying.
Okay.
Uh this is just um when people are
learning NPI you often see them I have
an example where um you have to compute
pi in parallel and people write um so
you have a loop from one to n and you
want to split it up across the processes
and people in when they're writing their
very early codes often write they write
a code which is specific to here four
processes they assume they're running on
four processes they say you know if rank
is zero I loop from one to n over four
if rank is while I loop from n over 4
plus one to n / two and they have four
code branches. That's clearly a bad
thing to do. It's not scalable. However,
so you shouldn't write code which only
runs on a particular process count.
However, um it's often easiest to make
peer compile time constant. It may not
be the most elegant thing to do uh
because you have to recompile your
program when you change the number of
processes. However, it c um compilation
is quite fast these days and it can make
things much easier. Um it can make
defining arrays and such like much nicer
if p is a compile time constant. Um so I
mean it's a m ideally a single
executable will run on any number of
processes without recompilation.
However, you know, if you're developing
your own code and your um your um the
time you can spend in developing the
code is limited, having p compile time
number of processes that compile time
comp is not necessarily a bad thing.
However, you have to check at runtime
that it's compile, it's running on the
right number of processes. So, if you've
compiled it for 20 processes and you run
it on 10, you have to say look, I can't
run you've compiled. But you know it's
if it's not necessarily a terrible thing
to have P a compile time constant. It
can make uh especially in languages like
C where array allocation is rather
hairy. Um um it can make things easier.
Um so this is a um this is an
interesting one. I so incorrect use of
nonblock. You do see this all the time.
This is where you write an incorrect
program which often still runs. Uh, can
anyone spot uh
what's wrong with this code?
So, um,
so no, so I I so I the isn is is is
send is is is a routine is send is non
synchronous send. So I just use that as
example. So that is a correct routine.
But but the um
uh
um
would you buy too many sounds, Stephen?
That's interesting. I don't quite know
what you you want me to
There's two sort of things wrong with
this code. um
which
the first is that um I've got this now
start compilation what I'm doing is I'm
using I'm doing
ah okay uh no but um
uh
uh this so okay so this code would work
because um I'm no so I'm not sending to
myself I'm sending to I okay it's
actually true that it's there's not a
log but it's a way the way I'm
specifically the way I'm using non-bot
communications. So what I'm doing here
is if rank you should really do this
with the broadcast but what I'm doing is
I'm saying if I'm ranked zero I loop
over everybody else one to size minus
one I send them a value and everyone
else receives that. So these sends and
receives do match up because one process
is doing size minus one sends and size
minus one processes are doing one
receive but it's the use of non-blocking
which is the problem here. Um
so you're absolutely right. There's no
point doing no absolutely right. So, so,
so, so, so, um, ah, okay. Right. So,
right, that's, so, so you're absolutely
right, Yousef, there's no point. So,
people overuse non-blocking. So, here I
shouldn't use non-blocking. There's no
need here. However, in a more
complicated this in a more complicated
example, I might need to do it. So, yes,
so there needs to be some
synchronization between this and this.
But a barrier is not what you need. What
you need to do is you need to make sure
that these non-blocking communications
have completed. So you need to wait.
Every non-blocking communication has to
have an appro has to have a wait where
you tell NPI I cannot proceed until this
communication has completed.
And the important point is that that
weight does two things. A it acts like a
barrier Steven has mentioned. So it it
makes sure that the the program waits
until that communication has been
completed. But more equally importantly,
it allows NPI to it knows that that
communication is finished and that you
have waited on it and it can then free
eternal resources. So there are actually
two problems with this code. One is now
start computation. I haven't waited for
these receives to complete. I don't know
these receives. They've been issued but
so I need to have a wait. Um so we need
um
uh so we so there's two problems here.
We need to have a weight here but also
okay here on so rank there needs to be a
weight here on these on these on these
um uh on these received to check they've
completed. The other problem is I'm
issuing multiple senses. So remember
when you issue a non-blocking
communication you're asking NPI to do
something in the future. Could you
please send this message sometime in the
future? What NPI gives you back is a
request. This is returned to you and
that is um effect like a ticket. This is
your ticket number or your or your your
receipt your order number for this for
this communication.
What I'm doing here is on this when I
when I do I equals 2, I'm issuing a
second MPI send to rank two, but I'm
overwriting the request. You see people
doing this quite a lot. They are
overwriting the request. So, so, so it's
like they've lost the first ticket. And
that is a problem because it means that
you will never ever tidy these things
up. You will never and this is a memory
leak. So you see this quite a lot. The
code this code would run. Okay, if you
were lucky it would run correctly
because you might be lucky and and and
and not have the equivalent of a barrier
here. Not having a weight here would you
might be lucky enough. But the problem
here is that you are um that you are um
you are overwriting the requests. Okay,
these tickets which NPI is issuing you
if you issue here size minus one
non-blocking send, it's up to you to
remember size minus one tickets. you
can't just overwrite them. Okay? And
that would lead to a memory leak because
NPI would never be able to tidy up uh
the sub all of the uh free the resources
associated with these ongoing
communications. Um and going back to
exactly what Yousef said right at the
start, why use non-blocking here at all.
Okay. So, you know, again, people tend
to overuse non-blocking not need for
simple pieces of code like of course
here you should really do a broadcast.
If you need to do a pattern like this
which couldn't be done through a
broadcast, you could, you know, avoid
the complication of non-blocking unless
it's performance critical. So you will
need to use non-blocking communications
down the depth of your code for halo
swapping and things like that for for
but but for setup at the start and then
shut down at the end, I would avoid
using non-blocking unless it's
absolutely necessary.
Okay.
Um so okay uh debugging I don't want to
maybe um
uh labor this point but I think that um
what I would say is that um debugging is
hard. Parallel programs are more
debugging any program is hard. parallel
programs are more complicated than
serial programs and therefore the so so
so writing good maintainable verifiable
code is even more important in parallel
program is in serial programming so I
think the major mistake that people make
is they whenever their program goes
wrong they assume it's a parallel bug
people say my program goes wrong on 256
processors there's some well maybe
you've just made a good oldfashioned bug
okay maybe it's just a bug bug so check
you haven't broken the serial Check you
haven't made a logic error in your in in
your algorithm.
Then run the parallelo with P equals
one, then run a small number of
processes. It's very it's relatively
unusual for a bug to manifest itself
only at very large numbers of processes.
Typically, if there's a bug in your
program, it will manifest itself on a
handful of processes and then it is
debugable. So the first thing you should
do if you find a bug in your program is
find the minimum number of processes on
which that bug or an equivalent bug
manifests itself and debug. So it really
is almost impossible to debug on large
numbers of process. Yes, parallel
debuggers exist. This is a very old lady
DDT. It's now called um ARM Forge.
However, debuggers are powerful tools,
but they're very complicated to learn.
um you know um um
old-fashioned verification printing is
is still a very useful technique but it
is only it's only possible to do
in every process if you if you're
running on a small number of processes
and so if you're developing your own
code um um I would say that you know
that the that that actually often the
debugger is is is
not it's not a panacea okay so someone's
asked question here.
So Alexa polish. So um
so was that you? Well, yes. So so so
what's probably happening here, Mark, is
that um that
um
that there's a load imbalance. In other
words, you've issued a lot of receipts.
You're expecting data to come in. Okay?
So so so issuing the receipts takes no
time. Okay? When you issue a receipt,
you're saying I would like to receive
some data sometime in the future. When
it comes in, put it here. So the receive
will um not take any time. However, when
you do a wait any what you do say, okay,
I'm going to wait until some data is
received. Okay. And so if it's showing a
long time there, it's just showing that
there's a load imbalance. That means
that the at the time you're waiting for
the data, it has not been sent yet. So,
so if you'd issued not if you'd used a
blocking receive, if you just did NPI
receive, the profiler would have showed
a lot of time in the receive waiting for
the data to come in here. Issuing the
receive is instantaneous because you're
saying, you know, sometime in the future
the data is going to arrive, put it
here. But it's the wait, which does that
make sense? So that that should so so
yes spending a lot of time in weight is
not unusual but it means that there's a
load imbalance. It means that you that
you there is you you're saying I'm going
to wait for some data to come in but
it's not been sent yet. Yeah that's a
good point. Yeah. Um
so wait any is say I have got a lot of
outstanding non-blocking receives please
wait until one of them has been
completed which is a which is a yeah
okay
so um I would this is one of my um
bug bears but um
I just stop people it seems to be people
write silent programs that that doesn't
your program should print things out I
don't want to over o overe this thing
but you know your program should you
know say hi I'm running on so many
processes should say whenever you're
doing parallel IO it should say you know
and you if you've got some iterative
loop every few hundred iterations it
should print out what it's doing and you
know if someone tells you my program
crashed and you say where did it crash
and they say I don't know you know even
printing high running on you know the
program started up okay so so just
giving general information as to where
your program is will give you invaluable
information when you want to debug it.
Um and then yeah this is this is my bug
people write raw numbers to the screen
you have to say what they are. Okay when
people people print you know 1 13 5.6
what is that? Here you want to print
that's the rank the value of J that's
the value of X. Okay. So you have to
annotate your outputs. Okay it it will
save you huge very very simple
techniques will save you huge amounts of
time in in in in the future. I don't
understand why people write raw numbers
to the screen without any text. Um so
this is why we want to say there's a
common mistake people make that there's
a bug. Okay but you changed something.
You switched compiler you put a print
statement in and it went away. Okay, so
there was a bug which you didn't
understand and something changed as I
said maybe you changed. Oh, I used GCC
instead of ICC and it went away. I put
another print in and it disappeared.
Okay, and you and it now works but you
don't know why. Okay, all is okay. No,
it's not. Okay, you have a bug there and
just by oh I I changed the compiler and
it it went away. Well, no. That means
you've got a problem. You have to find
there is a bug. You must find it. If
not, it will come late and bite you
hard. Okay, so you know sidest stepping
a bug is not a good thing to do. Okay,
it's useful to know that that it might
the bug appears in Intel compiler and
not the canoe compiler. That's useful
information, but that does not say that
means I should use the Intel compiler
with the GNU compiler. It says that you
should go you should try and find the
bug. Okay. And I said debugging is an
experimental science. You start with a
serial code. You start with the power of
one processor. You do it on a small
process count. And so for all this to
work, you have to have some definition
of your program being correct, which for
numerical code using floating point
numbers can be a slightly subtle
question. But you know it you need to
verify continually verify both the
performance and correctness of your code
on a range of process counts because you
need to pick up the bugs when they first
come in. Okay, if you introduce a bug,
you want it to be picked up immediately.
Now, if you're a modern software
developer, you'll have a huge suite of
regression test that run automatically
overnight through some um continuous
integration system. Well, yeah, maybe
you do, maybe you don't, but but you but
you it should be a way you should
achieve you should achieve that that
will be the ultimate aim. But just just
running by hand is is often better than
better than nothing.
Um I have a whole bunch of things about
whether whether code is working. I don't
really want to go into this in detail
but you know
the big problem in in parallel programs
is it is very unlikely that the output
will be will be this will be identical
different number of processes. Okay.
Because when you run a program on
different number of processes the
calculations are happening in a
different order. Okay. Floating point
operations are not um associative.
a plus a * b * c a + b + c is not the
same as a plus b + c. mathematically
addition is associative in finite
precision is not. So it is important to
have um some
verification results that you trust but
it is quite a subtle question but you
have to you have to accept that it's
very very difficult to write a program
which gives identical with floatingoint
numbers that you get identical output
for different numbers of processes. It
is possible but probably the performance
would be terrible. So it's a bit of this
slightly off topic here. um
optimization. Yeah, as you go along, run
your code number input date. So, so you
should you should debug your you should
verify your code is correct regularly as
you develop it. You should also verify
that the code is is is running
efficiently. You don't want to do
something which cripples the
performance. So, you should keep running
your code on a number of input data with
a range of NPI processes as you go
along. And then if the scaling is poor,
you need to find out what parallel
routines are the bottlenecks. And again,
this is much easier if you have a
separate commerce library. Okay, if you
run a profiler and it says um you're
spending mark here for example, you're
spending um 57% of your time in NPI any
well if you call NPI weight any lots of
times you don't know where that is. If
the profiler says you're spending 57%
57% of your time in weight 10 and by the
way 50% of your time in a code in a
routine called NPI halo swap then you
know that it's the halo swaps that are
doing it. So knowing how much time your
program takes in each NPI call not
necessarily useful information. You
don't know where it's being called from.
So again having your communications
library communications in a separate
library makes both debugging and
performance optimization easier. Um it's
very easy to think that it's your
parallel performance. Sometimes you do
language which cripples the serial
performance and you have to work on the
serial code. Okay.
Um I will cover for erase syntax here.
It's a bit subtle. Um so um
I said that for nonontiguous data uh you
should use a vector. Okay. So NPI drive
types enable strider data to be sent and
received. You don't need there's no
explicit copy and not copy out required
um for for a for program might say well
why not use for array syntax and you can
I can use for array syntax to select
non-ontiguous data there are subtleties
for non-blocking operations which I'm
going to cover here
so
if I'm a four program and I did this
allocate buff npis
or I send buff and then I deallocate it
what's wrong with that why is that code
incorrect?
So I'm allocating a buffer telling NPI
to send it send it in a non-blocking
way. So I'm telling please send this
buffer sometime in the future. Okay. And
I'll come back and check later if it's
been sent and immediately deallocating
the buffer. Why is that a problem?
Yes, you have you can you you cannot
deallocate before because because what
happens later on NPI will say I want to
send the data now and it will find the
buffer isn't there. It's it's a null and
you might get a crash. Okay, so that's
hopefully relatively obvious that's
wrong unfortunately. So non-block
instead may still be ongoing at
allocation. The code could crash or give
unpredictable behavior. It's only safe
to deallocate after the matching weight
which is the same thing as saying the
receive Ricky saying that receive has
been posted. If you wait on this
communication and and it's it's
completed that means the receiver has
been cooked and you get identical issues
in C using mal control. However, because
for channel has quite sophisticated
array handling this can happen in a in a
non-obvious way. And so the problem here
is I do real dimension mn array and I
say I want to send this second index uh
which is non-ontiguous in for what I
will do is I will I will just do an
array syntax one to n. Okay.
Now this looks okay but probably what
the compiler does is under the hood it
when it sees this before what it does is
it does a copy in call the function copy
out. Okay.
So, unfortunately, at least in the older
for interfaces,
the compiler did not know that this
function NPI extend had um long-term um
effects that the compiler is assuming
that once this this function returns to
the main program, everything is
completed. And so, copy in call function
copy back out perfectly legitimate. The
problem is we know that this has this is
carrying on after the call returns and
so if the compiler does this then you've
got a problem. So mo more modern m if
you use the forran 2008 interface you're
probably safe here. If you use the
forran 90 interface you're probably not.
Um so um it is a subtlety. So you have
to be careful if you use array syntax.
Um so it's only an issue for
non-blocking operations. Okay, for
blocking operations, this would be
absolutely fine because when this
routine is returned, we would know that
it had completed and used and finished
all its arguments just because
non-blocking operations are what you
might call asynchronous. They carry on
in the background. You get this problem.
Um so um the advice is um avoid array
syntax and use um uh use vectors.
However, this has been solved for more
modern
um interfaces where forran now can be
told that operations have non have
long-term effects through the I think
it's the is it asynchronous? Um I can't
remember what the attribute is. Um so if
you if if you there is a v there is a a
variable called npi subarray supported
which which tells you so if npi subarray
supported is true then this code will
work because the library or the note
does the right thing okay it it it makes
sure that the data is persistent until
the operation has been waited on is
completed so it is a slightly subtle
point but I have seen problems with
this. Um, and so I've I wrote a simple a
little test code for this. But there is
now if you if you use the for 2008 space
then typically this this this is not a
problem. But if you're paranoid, you
should check by checking is is Mi
subarray supported uh true or not.
Um there's a lot here about allocation
issues with C. Um, I don't want to go
into this in in a huge amount of of of
of of of
detail, but the problem with C is that
if you do multi-dimensional arrays and
you do pointers to pointers, which is a
standard way of doing things, then your
data is not contiguous. You have
fragmented data and that's the problem.
both that means that it's it's it's
if you if if if you if you allocate two
dimensional arrays in C by first
allocating a bunch of of pointers to the
to the rows if you want to call it that
and then then allocating the rows
themselves you get fragmented data and
that gives you problems. What you really
want is you want to have so if you have
pointers to pointers in your
multi-dimensional C arrays you really
want to make sure your data is
contiguous and by default that won't be
true. I um so this is showing if if you
do two dimensional arrays like this you
basically you have a in double star x
and you you maloc some pointers and then
you individually maloclock the you might
the rows if you're thinking of a matrix
here then x points some pointers which
point to the data but the data is all
over the place in memory and that means
that I you know there's no relationship
between this element this element this
element and this element I can't use a
vector to send that data because I don't
know where it is in memory. Um so again
there is I I'll I'll provide the
routine. There isn't a routine. There's
a way of doing this which solves the
problem. The problem is you still have
pointers to pointers but you do a single
maloc for the data and fudge up the
pointers by hand. And I I have an
example which I actually don't think
I've put on the website called array
maloc 2D which shows you how to do this.
But if you are going to use dynamic
array allocation in C with Malot, you
have to be careful. You don't you don't
do the naive thing of allocate lots of
pointers then individually allocate um
the data associated with those pointers
because it means that your data is
fragmented and your subsequent NPI calls
will be slowed because you won't be able
to use vectors or you won't be able to
broadcast the array as a SQL entity
because it is fragmented in memory and
so you should use more clever dynamic
array allocation tricks to do that and I
have an example there. Um and this is
stuff which is not relevant. This is
really just
um um so yeah so in C fixed size arrays
hash to find are simple and easy to use
but you need to recompile. Dynamically
allocated melodies are more complex.
They come from the heap. Um variable
length arrays
are frowned on by purists. This is where
you do int x n where n a variable not a
constant. The main problem is they come
whoops sorry there's something in front
of you. The main problem is they come
from the stack which is limited size. So
so you know if you want to do dynamic
array allocation at runtime you probably
want to use some version of maloc not
um but because they run so so I'm
basically saying that in C if you're
going to allocate large amounts of
memory uh for for your major arrays you
need to be clever and don't do pointers
to pointers to pointers. Make sure your
data is actually a single contiguous
block.
Um a final one here which is I'll just
um slightly more um in in
NPI um um message matching is quite
quite quite subtle. um and and
what it if if I'm if I'm um if I'm
imagine I'm sending an NPI vector which
might be a set of three which might be
remember a vector it can be a
non-ontiguous block of memory it has
blocks and gaps in it. So if I send an
NPI vector which is for example a block
of three and a gap and a block of three
what actually NPI does is at least
logically is it packs that data into a
single block of six and then on the
receive side
so if I send a vector okay I send one
vector here I don't need to receive one
vector as long as the receive receives
here say six integers that is fine so
message matching is slightly subtle in
MP API that allows you to do nice tricks
that if I send this data in flight the
message is just six um let's say they're
integers six integers and I can receive
that in the same pattern I can receive
in a contiguous pattern I could receive
it as a different vector as long as I
send six integers and I receive six
integers those messages will match
that's they're compatible with each
other that the spacing the pattern the
gaps in them don't matter And this
allows you to do nice tricks. And this
allows you to avoid hand copying. Often
people copy data, send it and and I'm
sorry, they pack data, send it and
unpack it at the receive side. This
trick allows you often to avoid that
because for example, if I have um data
which I've read in from memory which is
contiguous, but I want to send it to a
lot of processes where they want it to
be the interior. If I often the data I
read in from disk is just data but the
arrays I have in memory have halos on
them. How do I send that data into
there? Well, I can play tricks by
sending the data as a contiguous block
and receiving it as a vector. So, it's a
bit of slightly off topic here actually
but but um
understanding the message matching rules
in NPI basically saying if you send six
integers you can receive them as six
integers. It doesn't matter how they're
padded, how they're distributed, how
they're packed allows you to to do nice
things and what we'll do is we will if I
have time we'll exploit this when I do
the advanced use of data types at the
end of the day. So this is maybe I will
come back to this doesn't make sense
now. So the conclusions I'm slightly
okay you know for debugging run on a
variety of machines or or or more um
uh accurately run on different debug
your code using different compile sorry
compile and check your code is correct
using different compilers but also
different libraries versions of the NPI
library keep it simple you know don't
use non-blocking you don't need it
maintain a serial version if you can to
allow you to always check your code is
correct don't see more bugs are parallel
bugs that is the biggest mistake you
make you know and find a debugger you
like or if it's your own code I say
actually debugs are often not as useful
as as as as as a good test suite and and
by hand debugging
so that was a bit of a a butterfly
collecting or stamp collecting lectures
but the other lectures will be more
focused but does anyone have any
questions about that are we still on the
I will just
um
Okay. So, I'm just trying I've lost I I
I'm trying to I'm on my laptop for
various reasons. I am slightly
uh
lost as to where my control is. Okay. Uh
stop hearing. Okay. So, um,
what we'll do is if I go to the
timetable,
uh,
we're going to be back here at, uh,
in 25 minutes at, uh, 11:45. We'll do
NPI. So, okay. So, I will, uh,
check.
H, okay. So, that in is it best still to
use the MP to do? That's a very good
question. Uh
um
I'm oldfashioned. I would do the I don't
know. I mean you have I mean under the
hood NPI is probably doing a copy
probably. It might be able it's possible
NPI could avoid the copy. Okay. I I
don't to be honest my for rather
oldfashioned. I don't know how Foreshan
2008 implements the asynchronous free
NPI. It could do one of two things. It
could make a copy. It could make a copy
and just make sure that copy was around
until until the the
or it could do clever things with um
you know passing away script. I'm so so
so
I because I grew up in a time when for
indexing was not guaranteed to work
because the for 2008 interface did not
exist. Um when I learned NPR I would
always do the vectors because that's
guaranteed always to work. Um but maybe
I'm old-fashioned
um because you might say well the
compiler is I don't really know. That's
a very good question. I mean, do you
mean better in terms of performance or
better in terms of code maintainability
or outcome? I don't know.
Um,
to be honest,
I would do the NPI vectors because I
Yeah,
I it very much depends. I don't know. I
don't know. I I I I would have thought
that
I would have there's probably fewer
copies if you do the vectors. I might be
wrong but my concern is that often
the for 2008 interface can be for is a
very challenging language and I think
things can go wrong. I I I I I mean um
the GNU Yeah, the GNU compiler is a bug
that if you pass array subsections, it
mess I I just
I would never be I would if if if I had
a program that went wrong and I was
using the for 2008 interface and array
syntax, I would always be is there
something going wrong here? But is there
is it not quite doing it right? Um
yeah I I I but I I'm sure if you asked a
more modern format programming they
might have a different answer but the
function interface is great but um um it
does rely heavily on your forran
compiler being 100% correct and doing
everything correctly and a lot of areas
of the forran standard aren't exercised
that much. You know a lot of for pros
are pretty old-fashioned. So when people
start using modern features, I'm always
concerned there could be bugs there.
They just haven't been exercised yet. So
I would go with the vectors, but I it's
a very good question. I don't know.
It'll be an interesting thing to try.
Interesting to try.
Okay. So I'm I'm going to take a a break
now. Um
I, as I said, I'm
struggling with multiple